--- 1 ---

Good morning.
Thank you madam president

I'm going to present the work done during the last three years for my PhD,
entitled "Multiple transforms for video coding", which is focused on improving
the video coding quality by enabling the use of multiple transforms at the
same time.
This work has been directed by Olivier Déforges from INSA of Rennes and
supervised by Pierrick Philippe from Orange.

--- 2 ---

I will start with a general introduction to the context into which this work
is placed, the main motivations for video compression and how state-of-the-art
video coders work.

--- 3 ---

We are now in the era of the Internet and videos.
Last year, video streaming represented around 70% of the Internet traffic, and
Cisco has forecast that in 5 years they will represent more than 80%.

Carrying out my PhD work in a company inside the telecommunications sector who
is a content and Internet service provider, makes it obvious the fact that
video files need to be compressed in order to reach more clients with more
content using the same infrastructure.

Moreover, as new formats emerge such as 4K and new applications like virtual
reality require improved quality, there is a continuous need for video
compression.

In this graph, extracted from Cisco's forecast, we can see the amount of data
that video streaming represents with regards to other common activities.
The Y-axis contains Exa bytes per month (Giga, Tera, Peta), 10 to the
power of 15.

--- 4 ---

One very important part of the context in this PhD is the standardisation.
All the work has been done on top of and compared to HEVC, which was released
in 2013.
Since I the start of my PhD coincided with the beginning of the
standardisation phase of a future video coder, my first works began with an
exploratory period in which complexity constraints were relaxed.
However, we always kept in mind that we wanted to come out with a suitable
video coding solution for a future video coder for around 2020.

--- 5 ---

Now, let's take a quick look at a simplified video coding scheme which
contains the basic ideas that will be useful for the rest of the presentation.

A video encoder works with video files, which are just sequences of images.
It is a very complex problem, so, instead of treating each image as a whole,
images are split into blocks.
These blocks are then predicted using previous information, then transformed,
quantised and binarised into the bitstream.
The encoder then performs the inverse quantisation and transform to
reconstruct the image, which is used to derive the predictions.
These predictions can be made from the same images (intra) or from other
images (inter).
All this is performed in a rate-distortion optimisation loop that allows the
encoder to choose the best block size via a quad-tree model, prediction, etc.

We will focus on the transform stage in this diagram.

--- 6 ---

In this section we will introduce the concept of the transform, have a look at
the kind of signals they process and how are they designed.
Moreover, we will also test different designs.

--- 7 ---

A transform is a mathematical function that maps a signal from one domain
to another. It is just a change of basis.

The simplest example is a 2D rotation.
Here we need both coordinates x0,x1 to represent the signal, but applying a
rotation of 60 degrees counter-clockwise, we only need one coordinate, so we
have halved the amount of data.

We want these transforms
	- to be of low complexity for real time applications,
	  especially on the decoder side for low-end devices.
	- To achieve a compact representation of the signal.
	- To be orthogonal: invertible for perfect reconstruction and the
	  inverse is computed quickly.


--- 8 ---

Another important aspect of transforms is separability.
Transforms can be separable or non-separable.
Non-separable transforms have the advantage of being more performing, since
they can exploit any linear correlation within a block, contrary to separable
transforms, who can only decorrelate pixels sharing the same row or column.
However, non-separable transforms more complex.
Here's an example for a 4x4 block:
A separable transform would process the rows, then the columns, but a
non-separable transform, would process all the pixels at once.

--- 9 ---

As we saw in the video encoder diagram, transforms process residual blocks or
prediction errors.
That is, the difference between the original block and the predicted block.
They have really different aspects, but the same transform is used for all of
them.

These residuals are generated as combinations of Transform Unit sizes (TUs)
and predictions, which can be performed spatially (the same image) or
temporally (other images).
The choice is made by the encoder in the rate-distortion optimisation loop.

--- 10 ---

In this thesis, I have put special focus on intra prediction residuals, so I
will explain them with a bit more detail.

In grey we have the parts of the image that have already been reconstructed
and are available at the encoder side.
In white we have the block we are trying to predict.
HEVC has 35 different ways of predicting, called modes: a gradient and mean
value projections and 33 directional prediction modes.
These directional prediction use the reconstructed image to predict the block
following particular directions, such as horizontal, diagonal or vertical.
Residuals tend to have lower values near the borders from which the prediction
was computed, and higher values far from the boundaries.

--- 11 ---

Transforms are design to achieve a good trade-off between the rate required to
transmit the transformed signal and the distortion introduced by the
quantisation.

We usually find in literature that the optimal transform is the KLT.
But this is true assuming there's a large amount of bits to transmit the
coefficients, the so called, high-resolution quantisation hypothesis.
However, this hypothesis is not valid for video coding, since signals are
heavily quantised.
As a result, Sezer proposed an alternative design approach focusing on
sparsity, which we are going to see in the next slide.

--- 12 ---

The rate-distortion optimised transform (RDOT) minimises the distortion and
the number of significant coefficients using a simple model for the rate
constraint: the zero norm, which counts the number of non-zero
coefficients.
This sparsity approach fits into the video coding syntax elements.

The RDOT is computed as follows:
This first term contains the difference between the original residuals and the
inverse transform of the transform quantised coefficients, that is, the
reconstruction, so it models the distortion.
The second term contains the zero norm of the transform and quantised
coefficients, which corresponds to the number non-zero values.
During my PhD, we proved that the optimal value of lambda does not depend on
the residuals PDF.

The objective is, for a given set of x_i's, find the transform A that
minimises J(lambda).

This can be done with an iterative algorithm in which for an initial
transform, the optimal coefficients are computed, the transform is updated,
and so on.

Next slide compares different transforms using this metric.

--- 13 ---

We have evaluated the 4x4 DCT-II from HEVC to our set of residuals, to obtain
this value, then we have evaluated the DST, which is the actual transform used
in HEVC for these kind of blocks.
The DST provides bit-rate savings, and the behaviour is very similar in this
RDOT domain.
The DST was computed as an approximation of the KLT, which gives slightly
better results, but not very significant.
Then we test the non-separable KLT, which works better.
Now we test the iterative design for our RDOTs.
First separable, and then non-separable.
They seem to have promising results, but we need to test them into a real
scenario, encoding video files.

--- 14 ---

For this reason we used the MDDT to learn a transform adapted to each one of
the prediction modes of HEVC.
The learnt transforms replace the default HEVC transforms and therefore, do
not require any extra signalling with regards to HEVC.

--- 15 ---

In the Y axis we have what we called the BD-rate, which stands for the amount
of bit-rate saved at equivalent quality, so the more negative it is the
better, meaning that we need less bit-rate to achieve the same thing.

The separable KLT performs slightly better than HEVC, but its non-separable
version adds a significant improvement.

The RDOT version overcomes the KLT in both separable and non-separable
approaches, notably.
Moreover, no sequence presents losses when using RDOTs.

--- 16 ---

Here's a table summarising the tested systems.
RDOTs present more favourable BD-rates.
The encoding time is the same, and has slightly increase due to the lack of
fast algorithms for these transforms, and higher for non-separable versions.
The same applies to the decoding time.
And the ROM stands for the storage requirements for the transforms.
Their coefficients need to be stored, and we are using 1 byte per coefficient
and there are 35 transforms per TU.

The main ideas to retain from this experiment are:
- That separability allows for higher bit-rate savings.
- That we are keeping the RDOT design for its higher performance from now on.

So the next experiment will be to find out the limits of this technique.

--- 17 ---

This section will introduce a brand new system: the mode dependent transform
competition, which consists in adding multiple transforms adapted to each IPM.

--- 18 ---

The main motivations are the residual variability inside the same IPM and the
fact that RDOT-based systems gave better results than KLT-based ones.

The design of the system, built on top of HEVC has a conservative approach:
The default transform is kept and a flag indicates whether it is used.
In case it is not used, the flag is raised and a fixed-length codeword
indicates the selected transform.
The learning algorithm is based on the RDOT metric and detailed in the
following slide.

--- 19 ---

In order to learn multiple transforms adapted to the same data set, a first
random classification is performed, and then for each subgroup, a RDOT is
learnt in the same way as for the MDDT systems.
Once they are learnt, the residuals are reclassified accordingly, then we
update the transforms, and so on.

--- 20 ---

This slide shows how the RDOT metric is minimised when adding more transforms.
We start at 35, which is the value of the DST, then we replace it with
separable and non separable RDOT, and finally we start adding RDOT to
complement the DST.
We can see how the metric decreases with the number of transforms.

--- 21 ---

A test sequence has been encoded with all those different MDTC systems and the
results in the BD-rate domain are pretty much aligned with the RDOT metric.
However, in this case, since we need to signal the transform so that the
stream is decodable, the BD-rate saturates, and after a certain point, it will
get worse.

Having validated experimentally the approach, we have designed a system with
16 transforms for 4x4 TUs and 32 transforms for 8x8 TUs in its separable and
non-separable versions.

--- 22 ---

The separable version has an average of around 4.1% bit-rate improvements with
regards to HEVC, and the non-separable version of around 7.1%.
All sequences present a gain, and there are some, such as BasketballDrill,
with 25% of bit-rate savings when using non-separable transforms, due to the
large amount of diagonal patterns, which separable transforms are not able to
treat.
We can note that most of the gain is lost with separable transforms.

The visual improvements for this sequence an be appreciated here:
some lines are lost when using HEVC, but maintained with our approach.
Both sequences have a bit-rate of around 3 Mbps.

--- 23 ---

Summary slide of the MDTC system.
- Important BD-rates: between 4 and 7%.
- Notably increased encoding time: between 8 and 20 times slower.
- Same decoding time as MDDT.
- Significant amount of storage requirements.

Since this thesis in inscribed inside a standardisation context, next steps
will focus on simplifying the system to make them usable.

--- 24 ---

In order to simplify the MDTC systems, we have chosen to tackle the problem
from the storage requirements.
Since the storage requirements is tightly related to the number of transforms
and the number of transforms is related to the system complexity.

--- 25 ---

The first thing to keep in mind is that non-separable transforms have been
discarded.
Despite the fact that they provide higher gains, their storage requirements
(in the order of MB) and their complexity seem just too high.
So, from now on, only separable transforms will be considered.

--- 26 ---

All systems designed up to now are making use of the same number of transforms
across all IPMs.
However the IPM usage is not uniform, leading us to think that it might be
wiser to put more transforms in modes that are more likely to be used than
into rare ones.

--- 27 ---

Another interesting aspect is that, due to the nature of how predictions are
derived, one can observe some symmetries across the 33 directional IPMs:

Residuals issued from modes 19-34 are closely related to the transposed
version of residuals from 2-18.
So it's like we can fold this diagram like this.

But we can take these symmetries one step further:
Residuals from predictions 2 to 10, present an horizontal symmetry axis:
errors done downwards are closely related to mirrored versions of errors down
upwards.

These equations present the operations needed to be done depending on the IPM.
Since they are all different ways of reading the residual values, they come at
no computational cost.

--- 28 ---

In order to see how systems are improved in the ROM - BD-rate plane, systems
have been drawn.
The Y axis represents the bit-rate savings and the X-axis the amount of ROM
taken by the transforms. We want to be as close as possible to the lower left
corner, of course.
4x4 systems making use of the same number of transforms per IPM are here.
Then 8x8 systems with the same number of transforms per IPM, and finally
combined systems using both 4x4 and 8x8 TUs.

We have created an algorithm that, for a given ROM constraint it selects the
best amount of transforms per IPM, taking into account the symmetries that
exist across IPMs.
As a result, we are able to design systems like these ones.
The bit-rate savings increase linearly with the log of the ROM.

Moreover, ROM savings of more than 50% are observed for the same BD-rate.

--- 29 ---

This slide presents some interesting working points of custom MDTC systems.

The main points to retain are:
- We can reduce ROM
- The maximum value of BD-rate has not been increased
- Coding complexity remains more or less the same

--- 30 ---

The final Chapter of my thesis, and this presentation, as well, is a
simplification of MDTC systems that use Discrete Trigonometric Transforms.

--- 31 ---

There are two notable reasons for using them:
- They are backed up with fast algorithms
- Their coefficients can be computed analytically
- They are more easily pushed into a standard

--- 32 ---

Here there are some examples of DTTs.

The first two, in bold, are used in HEVC, the other ones are combinations of
different types of DTTs.

Note that we can use a different transform for the rows and for the columns,
so we can increase our space of available transforms.

--- 33 ---

So the question now is: how do we design a system making use of these
transforms, if the transforms are already designed.
Using the RDOT metric again.

Well, there are 8 DCTs, 8 DSTs and their inverses:
If we combine all of them, with some geometrical manipulations, such as
mirroring operations and transpositions, we end up with 2018 transforms.
However, if we allow a difference in the scanning order of the result, the
number of different transforms is 256.

So now, when we want to design a system making use of N transforms, we need to
chose the N transforms that minimise the RDOT value.
For N=4 there are 1.75 x 10 to the power of 8 combinations.

Since this Chapter came late during the PhD work, we designed a sub-optimal
algorithm, that does not work well with big N's.

For these systems, all the non-homogeneous repartition and the symmetries from
the other approach still apply.

--- 34 ---

So, retaking the point where we left:
With our naive systems, and our system making use of symmetries, we can now
place DTT-based MDTC systems.
And we continue to improve the trade-off between the ROM and the BD-rate.
Learnings have not gone further than 4 kB, since the suboptimality of the
learning algorithm became too evident.

--- 35 ---

Finally, a comparison table between DTT and RDOT based MDTC systems.

For the same amount of ROM, DTT systems provide better BD-rates, while the
encoding complexity is a bit higher.
This is due to the fact that more transforms are available and, therefore, more
coding possibles are explored.

The decoding time, however, remains constant and equivalent to that of HEVC
thanks to the fast algorithms.

This is still a work in progress, so better results are expected by improving
the learning algorithm.

--- 36 ---

So now, we are going to talk about what can be concluded from this work and
what are the possible next steps.

--- 37 ---

This thesis shows that there is still a lot of room for improvement in video
coders.
Just by improving a single block of the whole coding scheme, I was able to
obtain 7% bit-rate savings when using non-separable transforms, 4% separable
and 2% (right now) using DTTs.

HEVC gained about 20% in intra coding with regards to AVC in 10 years by
revisiting the whole scheme.

I have also showed that a systematic and almost unsupervised learning system
can be performed off-line using the RDOT metric.
Some mathematical aspects have been proved, such as the independence from the
residuals PDF.

--- 38 ---

All these work has given place to 4 articles presented in international
conferences and one more submitted.
One of the already presented paper obtained the best paper award at VCIP 2014.

Moreover, 5 patent applications have been filled.

--- 39 ---

What about next?

The most obvious steps are to extend the system:
- we have only enabled transform competition for 4x4 and 8x8 TUs, but we could
  use them for 16x16 and 32x32, as well.
- we have only worked in intra coding (although when encoding in RA, we have
  2/3 of the gains of AI)
- we have only worked on the luma component, but we could also use it for the
  chroma

One aspect that we have not tackled is the encoding complexity:
we wanted to see what was the potential of this technique while being
reasonable on the decoder side.
We are performing an exhaustive search amongst all available transforms, which
might be not necessary.

We are using a simple approach to signal the transforms: maybe a smarted
signalling system with variable length codes could be used, or try to guess
the transform from a certain context.
Moreover, the quantisation of the transform was done quickly to the nearest
integer.
Having a better quantisation might slightly improve the system.

One final note before finishing, is that the use of multiple transforms is a
subject of interest these days.
Future video formats that are starting to take shape with the KTA2 are using a
very similar approach to the DTT-based MDTC system.

--- 40 ---

That's the end of my presentation.

Thank you for your attention.
